                               FWARC Questions


1. What specifically is the proposal that we are reviewing?

	This is the io-api component of the sun4v/projectQ case.
	(FWARC/2004/510)

	This case describes the io-api used by guests to do actual
	IO on PCI buses. Also included are APIs for iommu control
	and management.


2. What is the motivation for it?

	Provides a generic abstraction for IO to allow multiple
	guests to co-exist on the same hardware.

3. What is its plan?

     	dev-complete, ships with the Ontario Platform

4. Are there related projects in Sun?

	This is part of the sun4v/ProjectQ umbrella case (2004/510)

	sun4v umbrella 			FWARC/2004/510
	sun4v core API			FWARC/2005/116	20050222_john.johnson.3
	sun4v io-api			FWARC/2005/112	20050222_david.kahn.2
	sun4v bus bindings		FWARC/2005/111	20050222_david.kahn
	sun4v machine description	FWARC/2005/115	20050222_john.johnson.2
	sun4v Ontario Interfaces	FWARC/2005/117	20050222_john.johnson.4
	sun4v vBSC			FWARC/2005/081	20050208_jack.hayward
	sun4v vendor-specific FCodes	FWARC/2005/114	20050222_john.johnson
	sun4v "pci" device binding	TBD - fast-track

5. What is the technical content of the project?

	A list of APIs based on the Sun4v Core APIs (using the same
	trap numbers and argument/result format as the core API
	for IO interfaces.

6. How is the project delivered into the system?

	These interfaces are implemented and exported by the hypervisor,
	which is delivered as part of the platform firmware, and included
	in the firmware consolidation.

7. What are the project's hardware platform dependencies? Is it expected to
work on all systems (Desktop thru servers)?

	The processor must implement the sun4v sun-sparc extensions
	described in the sun4v Architecture Specification.

8. What is its FW operational environment:

	The sun4v core API document describes the interface.

	Basically, we use a hyperpriv. trap, and pass arguements
	and results in registers between the guest and the hypervisor.

	The interface is the trap number, function number, arguments
	and results for each call documented in this API.

	There are no signals, no command line syntax and no direct
	interaction with IEEE 1275.

9. What is its user interface (tty, graphical, leds, sound, etc.)?

	None. System user interfaces are provided by a service processor,
	with no direct interaction with these interfaces.

10. What are your project's other external interfaces (exported and
imported)?

	The interfaces extend and are based on the Sun4v Core API
	(for CPUs and memory).

	The interfaces are exported to the guest (sun4v OBP and sun4v OS),
	and imported by them. For the most part, the IO APIs will be
	imported by the "pci" nexus drivers.

	The interfaces could be used by any OS (linux, for example) and
	are documented sufficiently, though a clear proof won't exist
	for other OS' until a port is done for that OS.

	These interfaces are classified as "Sun Private".

11. What are its other significant internal interfaces (inter-subsystem and
inter-invocation)?

	None.

12. Is the interface extensible? How is the interface expected to evolve?

   * How is versioning handled?

	A generic versioning interface is provided.
	MSI data records include a type field and a version number.

   * What was the commitment level of the previous version? Can this version
     co-exist with existing standards and with earlier and later versions or
     with alternative implementations (perhaps by other vendors)?

	N/A. This is the first version.

	The versioning and interfaces are designed to allow evolution.
	A given platform can decide to support the current version and/or
	future versions of the API, depending on the requirements of the
	platform

	A common versioning API will be included to allow any client
	to query which version(s) of the IO API are implemented by
	the firmware on that platform.

	New functions will be added by using new function numbers.


   * What are the clients over which a change should be managed? How is
     transition to a new version to be accomplished? What are the
     consequences to ISV's and their customers?

	The clients are OBP and any OS that ports to sun4v.

   * Does this scale from low-end Desktops to high-end Servers? What, if
     any, trade-offs are involved?

	Yes it scales. No known tradeoffs.

13. How do the interfaces adapt to a changing world?

   * What is its relationship with (or difficulties with) System Service
     Processors?

	There is no direct relationship with the service processor
	for the IO API.

   * What security issues do you address in your project?

	None.

14. What internationalization issues are involved? N/A

     None.

15. How will the project contribute (positively or negatively) to "system
load" and "perceived performance":

   * What are the performance goals of the project? How were they evaluated?
     On what type of test platform?

	The sun4v project does add some overhead to running systems.
	The goal, I believe is no more than 5% overhead.

   * Does the application pause for significant amounts of time? Can the
     user interact with the application while it is performing long-duration
     tasks?

	No.

   * Does memory usage or heap space tend to grow with time/load? What
     mechanisms does the user have to use to control this? What happens to
     performance/system load?

	N/A.

   * What are the project's effects on boot time requirements?

	Some measurable effect .. the systems that implement
	sun4v tend to be larger systems with SPs/SCs that
	have more effect on boot time requirements than the
	existance of the hypervisor/sun4v interfaces have.

16. How does the project deal with failure and recovery?

   * How will it respond to failures? (Does it ever require reset? Use of
     stop key? Can it lock up?)

	In general, the hypervisor is able to catch failures prior
	to the guest OS seeing them, and for common types of errors,
	it can generate FMA reports directly and send them to an FMA
	server running elsewhere. Reports, where needed, are also
	sent to the guest OS via the usual reporting methods.

   * Does it attempt to isolate and contain the failure to allow for
     automatic recovery?

	The sun4v/hypervisor attemtps to isolate and contain all
	failures to a given guest.

   * How does it communicate a fault event? Does it depend on a working
     console device?

	This is platform specific, and specified elsewhere, but, in
	general, sun4v/hypervisor based platforms rely on an FMA
	server process running elsewhere, or possibly in a trusted
	partition on the server.

17. Issues? Please identify the issues which you would like the ARC to
address.

	None.

18. Appendices:

	See case materials.

19. Security


	These are internal private interfaces. HW provided identifiers
	are used to distinguish and isolate requests from different
	guests running on the platform. The sun4v/hypervisor's job
	is to ensure that only a guest with access to any given resource
	can access that resource, so security is effectively built-in.
	The API can only be called by priv. code running on the platform,
	such as OBP and the OS.


	#pragma ident	"@(#)fwarc-18Q.txt	1.3	03/08/21 SMI"
