#ident  "@(#)perf_api.txt 1.2     05/03/13 SMI"


1.0 Introduction

This document describes the hypervisor API used to support
performance instrumentation on a Niagara based system.

Section 2.0 summarizes the overall performance instrumentation
support provided by the Niagara processor.

Section 3.0 describes the overall hypervisor API used to access
Niagara performance registgers.


2.0 Niagara Performance Instrumentation

Niagara processor provides the following performance instrumentation:

	- SPARC performance instrumentation
	- DRAM performance instrumentation
	- JBUS performance instrumentation


2.1 SPARC Performance Instrumentation

Each hardware strand has a pair of registers to control/capture
CPU specific instrumentation:

	Description					Access
	-------------------------------------		--------
	SPARC Performance Control Register		ASR=0x10
	SPARC Performance Instrumentation counter	ASR=0x11

These registers are directly accessible by the privileged code and 
no hypervisor API is needed to provide access to these registers.


2.2 DRAM Performance Instrumentation

Each DRAM channel in Niagara has a pair of performance counters, packed 
into a single register, plus a register to control what is counted.
The following table summarizes the location of these counters:

	Description			Location
	--------------------------	------------------
	DRAM Perf Control Register	0x97.0000.x400
	DRAM Perf Counter Register	0x97.0000.x408

where x is 0 through 3 for 4 different DRAM channels.

Since memory configuration CSRs are located in the same address range
as the DRAM performance registers, a guest OS can't be allowed direct
access to the DRAM performance registers as it can compromise the overall
system integrity.

Hypervisor will provide an API to allow read/write access to these
registers.


2.3 JBUS Performance Instrumentation

JBI has a pair of performance counters, packed into a single register,
and a register to control what is counted.

	Description			Location
	--------------------------	------------------
	JBUS Perf Control Register	0x80.0002.0000
	JBUS Perf Counter Register	0x80.0002.0008

Similar to DRAM performance registers, hypervisor will provide an
API to allow read/write access to these coutners.


3.0 Hypervisor API for DRAM/JBUS Performance Registers

Since memory configuration CSRs are located in the same address range
as the DRAM performance registers, a guest OS can't be allowed direct
access to the DRAM performance registers as it can compromise the overall
system integrity.

DRAM and JBUS performance registers on a Niagara platform will not
be directly accessible by the privileged software. Instead, hypervisor
provides an interface to read/write these performance registers.

Access to these performance reigsters is controlled via machine
description ("perfctraccess" property).  Presence of this property
indicates that a guest should be allowed access to the performance 
registers and this is enforced by the hypervisor.


3.1 Definitions

Each DRAM and JBUS performance register is assigned a unique 
performance register (PerfReg) number as follows:


	PerfReg		Description
	-------	------------------------------------
	   0	JBUS Performance control register
	   1	JBUS Performance Counter register

	   2	DRAM Performance control register 0
	   3	DRAM Performance Counter register 0

	   4	DRAM Performance control register 1
	   5	DRAM Performance Counter register 1

	   6	DRAM Performance control register 2
	   7	DRAM Performance Counter register 2

	   8	DRAM Performance control register 3
	   9	DRAM Performance Counter register 3


This number uniquely identifies the performance register for 
reading/writing purposes.


3.2 API calls

The following function numbers are applicable to accessing Niagara's
DRAM/JBUS performance registers:

	NIAGARA_GET_PERFREG		0x100
	NIAGARA_SET_PERFREG		0x101


3.2.1 niagara_get_perfreg

	    Entry:
		trap#		FAST_TRAP
		function#	NIAGARA_GET_PERFREG
		arg0		PerfReg

	    Exit:
		ret0		status (success or error code)
		ret1		Performance register value

This call reads the value of the DRAM/JBUS performance register,
as specified by the PerfReg argument.

Upon successful completion, it returns EOK status and performance
register value. Ohterwise, it returns one of the following errors:

	EINVAL			Invalid performance register number
	ENOACCESS		No access allowed to performance registers


3.2.2 niaggara_set_perfreg
	    Entry:
		trap#		FAST_TRAP
		function#	NIAGARA_SET_PERFREG
		arg0		Performance register ID
		arg1		Performance register value

	    Exit:
		ret0		status (success or error code)

This calls sets the DRAM/JBUS performance register, as specified by
the arg0, to the value specified in arg1.

Upon successful completion, it updates the specified performance register
value and returns EOK status. Ohterwise, it returns one of the following 
errors:

	EINVAL			Invalid performance register number
	ENOACCESS		No access allowed to performance registers


